this is the lesson 8 in the natural
language processing course
today we talk about lexical similarity
outline is as follow
first we will start to Define lexical
similarity
then we will learn three similarity
measures levenge time distance jacket
index and cosine similarity
next three lexical Vector models are
examined binary weighting term frequency
and tfidf
let's start by getting to know the term
lexical similarity first
lexical similarity is a perspective that
focuses on the formal similarity of
linguistic items
there is no goal of using any semantic
details
the human brain responds most to visual
stimuli
therefore lexical similarity still has
an important place in text comparison
studies as it can provide a quick
preliminary information
lexical similarity at the word level
deals with the character position of the
word while semantic similarity considers
the conceptual meaning depending on the
approach
for example the word sample and simple
which are shown in the table and are
semantically dissimilar are very similar
Lexi Cali
on the contrary the word sample and
instance which are Lexi Cali dissimilar
are synonymous to each other
although there are many methods in the
literature the following three methods
are still popular for lexical similarity
these are love inch time distance jacket
index and cosine similarity
here love inch time measures the
dissimilarity of the two strings while
jacket and cosine measure the similarity
of them
is a distance metric for measuring the
difference between two sequences
informally the love inch time distance
between two words shows the minimum
number of Single Character edits
required to change one word into the
other
in measurement three operations can be
used
addition a character
alternation a character or deletion a
character
here is an example of how to calculate
the levenge time distance between the
words Honda and Hyundai
if we start changing the word Honda we
first need to add a letter Y then
convert the letter O to letter U and
finally add a letter i to the end of the
word
because of these three operations their
distance to each other is calculated as
3.
jacket index is a statistic used for
comparing the similarity of the
diversity of sample sets
the jacket coefficient measures
similarity between finite sample sets
and is defined as the size of the
intersection divided by the size of the
Union of the sample sets
the algorithm of jacket index contains
these four steps
the first count the number of elements
characters or words in intersection of
both sets words or texts
the second count the number of elements
in Union of both sets
the third divide the number of
intersection by the number of Union
and the fourth multiply the number found
by 100.
cosine's similarity is a function that
measures the cosine value of the angle
between 2 vectors
however in order to measure the cosine
similarity of the words it is first
necessary to convert them to vectors
we talked about semantic word vectors
before but since our topic here is
lexical similarity we will focus on the
lexical Vector models which is an
appropriate approach
in our previous lessons we talked about
the benefits of converting texts to
vectors
here however we will focus on methods
that unlike the previous ones require
less material such as a corpus in
computation
considering the chronological evolution
of lexical Vector models the three
approaches in order from primitive to
complex are as follows
first binary waiting
second term frequency
and finally term frequency inverse
document frequency or for short tfidf
in binary weighting
if a document includes a term the weight
of that term for the document is one
otherwise zero
as an example the following two
sentences represent two separate
documents
first the combination of these two
documents is discussed
in this example the union set is
represented by Bell short for bag of
words
each document is then vectorized
according to whether it contains the
term in the Bell
in term frequency weighting
if a document contains a term the weight
of that term for the document is the
number of times that term is used in
that document 0 otherwise
note the variation of the document 1
Vector for the same example
tfidf is a numerical statistic that is
intended to reflect how important a word
is to a document in a collection or
Corpus
the tfidf value increases proportionally
to the number of times a word appears in
the document and is offset by the number
of documents in the Corpus that contain
the word which helps to adjust for the
fact that some words appear more
frequently in general
while calculating on the previous sample
documents first the term frequency
weights are calculated
then the weights are normalized
according to the TF max value found
then IDF calculation is made for each
word in the back of words list
each word is counted in how many
different documents it has been used
words in multiple documents have a lower
IDF
for example the first and the last words
for both documents are the same and
their IDF values are lower than the all
other words
TF weight vectors are calculated
separately for each document
IDF is calculated only for common bag of
words
in the final step each TF Vector is
multiplied by the IDF weight Vector to
become the representation Vector of the
document
in another example let's say that the
sentence is D1 and D2 are given to
represent two Turkish documents
now that we know how the tfidf is
calculated our goal here is to find out
which of the documents we have most
closely resembles a newly arrived queue
document
as a pre-processing step we will clear
the stop words that already have a low
IDF value
we will first start by calculating the
jacket index
thus we will be able to compare with
tfidf and cosine base similarity
calculation
here no words were found at the
intersection of the Q and D1 documents
while two words were found at the
intersection of q and d 2.
there are 11 words in the combination of
the three documents
with these calculations it is clear that
document Q is more similar to D2
on the other hand in order to calculate
cosine similarity it is necessary to
First calculate criteria such as TF TF
Norm IDF and tfidf
in the table the calculations of Q D1
and D2 documents are made respectively
first the Q document was calculated
the second the d-1 document was
calculated
since the IDF row is calculated jointly
it remains unchanged in all three
documents
finally the criteria of the D2 document
are calculated
note that all of the bag of words in the
column labels of the table are in Lemma
form
it is a great advantage to lametize all
the words in the documents to increase
the number of matches
two similarity values calculated using
all tfidf vectors are shown in red
just as in the jacket index the
similarity of Q and D2 is higher
however when the calculated values are
compared the value found by the
similarity of tfidf and cosine seems to
be stronger than that of jacket
lexical Vector models have some
disadvantages as well as advantages such
as fast computation easy adaptation to
small corpora and clarity
perhaps the most significant drawback is
the large Vector sizes that cannot be
adjusted
for example a corpus was created with 62
000 reviews from a website containing
reviews of IMDb movie reviews
approximately 160
000 words were identified in the bag of
words of this Corpus
the tfidf vectors to be calculated in
such a corpus will have 160
000 dimensions
considering that each cell of the vector
will be 4 bytes approximately 37
gigabytes of free memory will be needed
for all comments
this is an inefficient approach to
memory usage
if so describe any other problems you
notice
is there a problem special to Turkish
next let's discuss how we can get rid of
these disadvantages
please indicate your opinions on this
subject by relating them to other
subjects you have learned within the
scope of NLP
we have seen that the love inch time
distance method is a very successful
method for comparing words
but it was not mentioned in lexical
Vector models
could there be a reason for this
or can we measure document similarities
by using levenge time distance
if your answer is yes how can we do it
if you say no why
that's all
please write your summary about the
lesson